Hey, Tim McCord is on, talking to Whitney Otto.
Your third novel, the first was a spectacular success, and then the second, I hate it when, you know, the expectation for the second is dependent on the first, but how did you see this third one coming into it, you know, after the spectacular success of the movie of the first?
Well, I don't want to judge it, but, you know, I mean, I hate to quote other reviewers, but, you know, it was like they were waiting with their knives, I guess, and you must have felt a little apprehensive, I guess, coming into this.
Well, I was apprehensive because it was my second novel and also the subject matter.
You mean the second or the third?
The second novel.
Okay, yeah.
It was, you know, it was something that seemed
I don't mean controversial in a big way, but seemed open to a lot of discussion.
And when I wrote it, I didn't think that it was.
I thought that everyone knew.
But anyways, and I think also I attempted to write... Everyone knew what?
I'm sorry.
Oh, that women become marginalized or invisible if they age in America.
And I tried to write about it.
I mean, I thought it was an old story that I was going to write about in maybe a slightly different way.
And the reviews on it...
would be like mixed, but then ultimately end negatively.
And it was a different experience.
But in a way, it wasn't a horrible experience because Quilt had, for me, unexpectedly done so well that having my next novel not do as well was kind of a release in a strange way.
And so the third one... Well, a relief in what strange way?
I think because... I say this as an author who's working on a second book right now.
I don't want to go through that.
I think, let's see... I'm teasing, but go ahead.
No, but I think, I mean, it was a relief kind of because I kept thinking, you know, how can I measure up to quills?
And since...
Since it was so surprising to me that it did that well, it wasn't like I wrote a quilt and expected anything to come from it.
And, of course, when things did, I kept thinking, how can I recreate this experience?
But, of course, you can't, you know.
You can't.
Yeah.
The first book is magic.
Exactly, exactly.
And people cut you a lot of slack on the first book, I think.
I know as a critic myself, and particularly first novels, you do cut slack.
You better.
You should.
I think it's incumbent upon you to take a first novel on its own terms as a first novel.
The only problem I have with my work being reviewed is if the review tends to just review the work and say, you know, this isn't for me, or I think this is weak,
you know, this isn't coming across as, I mean that's okay, but sometimes the reviews step over into something more personal, like she thinks she's blah blah blah and I think, well you can't know that about me because you haven't talked to me. You don't know what what I'm doing. When they read more into it and it gets a little personal like. I think actually in my own review or perhaps in Boston who said something about haven't we got past women picking up the coffee or something I thought well since I've been working in offices most of my life
I'm here to say, no, we haven't, but there have been other strides, but that wasn't what my book was about anyways, with, you know, who makes the coffee.
So it was like almost this willful misreading, but I thought, but at the same time, I really respect that people are entitled for their own opinion, and it really doesn't, I mean, I don't have, like, reviews packed on my walls, and I don't have the names of people tattooed on my brain.
It's not that way.
You don't?
No, actually I don't.
For my book, I had wonderful reviews in the New York Times and the Washington Post, but you always remember that one line where they zap you, you know?
Yeah, I mean, I can remember it and I can think, wait a minute.
You can quote it even.
I can, you know?
Yeah.
You can't?
No, I mean, I can't remember necessarily where I read it or sometimes, you know, I met one critic in another situation and
I was talking to her, and she was so kind of tentative around me, and I thought, I don't understand.
And then she said, I'm sorry I didn't like your book.
I did or I didn't?
She didn't.
And I thought, oh, well, you know, that's not like the issue for me if it's a fair review.
As long as it's not personal, as long as it's not mocking.
When I was a book review editor, which I did for many years,
I would never publish a walking review.
I mean, if you don't like it, set it out, explain it, but do it respectfully.
I mean, it's not easy to write a book.
And I think sometimes, too, with writers, I mean, people act like they deliberately wrote a book that sort of misses the mark, and you think, actually, I did the best job I could.
Really?
So anyway, we come into this third book.
This is quite an interesting thing.
By the way, you're from Oregon, is that right?
I'm from California, but I live in Oregon.
I've lived there a few years.
Where do you live, in Portland?
Yeah.
Because I write a column, and Eugene is one of my papers.
Oh, really?
Yeah.
I'm in the Register Guard every week.
What I've done basically is I'm in university towns like Eugene and Salt Lake City and Charlottesville, Virginia, and Jackson, Mississippi, about 20 papers, but Columbus, Madison.
University towns.
Oh, yeah.
Well, that was the whole concept here.
I figure, you know, a real brainstorm here.
I wonder where they read books, you know, where they're interested in books other than the usual stuff, you know.
Yeah.
So I've been doing this.
Well, you don't have to know the history of this, but I was interested in the fact that you're here in Oregon.
So anyway, let's talk about the audacity of this third novel.
It's quite a risk.
I've often wondered, all right, fine, you want to write about somebody like Shakespeare or Michelangelo or
You really better have a sense of their character, don't you think, and their creative spirit and their genius.
So tell me a little bit about that aspect of the new novel.
Well, I actually wanted to write about the creative life, and I wanted to write a book about artists.
Well, I wanted to write a love story.
Well, you have both.
Yes, and I wanted to place them and give them creative lives, all the artists.
The kind of artists I think of as quiet or working stiff artists, because so much is always done about the artist who's so outwardly rebellious, who dresses a certain way and does drugs and drinks too much and has too many lovers and no stability and is so mentally out there.
We can only call them genius, and sometimes they are and sometimes they aren't.
but a lot of sort of like acting out.
And I thought about all these other artists who are just as creative, who are just as dedicated and just as sort of consumed by their work, but they turn more inward in a way.
You know, they have quieter lives, like, you know, Joseph Cornell or Rene Magritte or even, you know, Flaubert, who said, you know, your life should be as bourgeois as possible.
Do you want to make art or do you want to write a book?
And so I thought about those people.
And I also...
thought about how whenever you see artists in the movies no matter how destitute they are they have just such a cool place to live you know really nice clothes you know I mean they always seem to have this sort of set life in a sense and I wanted to show how artists actually sometimes have to make a living and you know ways that they do live and so I wanted to address that and I wanted to more than anything create a world that seemed really accessible to someone who wasn't an artist they didn't want um
someone who's not an artist to think, well, why would I be interested in these self-indulgent people or why, you know, there's something about people who are like really flamboyant artists who try and sort of exclude, I don't know, I don't know what you would call, say non-artist.
And I think that's not quite fair.
I don't think the world is that rarefied.
I mean, artists certainly do contribute a lot to society.
They contribute everything to society.
But you know what I mean?
I kind of thought,
Well, if I wrote about like a different story with artists, like the different kind.
I mean, because I find this in my own life sometimes.
If you're broke, you're an artist.
If you drink too much, you're an artist.
If you treat people around you, you know.
Or if you make too much money as an artist, you're a sellout.
Exactly.
You've gone commercial, right?
Right.
As they say, here's to say in the 50s, you're going commercial.
And they forget that at some point you were unknown too.
And you all start from the same point.
It's just that some kind of good fortune or lady luck or something steps in for you.
And as much as I hate to say it, it has to do with what you've produced and it doesn't.
You know what I mean?
So there's a little bit of lack of control to what happens to you.
And I do think sometimes there are people who are very good who don't get their due.
Tell me about, if you might, the idea of spanning the centuries here, really, going from Florence and the Renaissance and zooming ahead 400 years to the early 20th century.
Well, I knew I wanted my artist to go from artist colony to colony, and I had to think of what would the starting point be,
And I thought, well, I know it's a 20th century story, but I just knew that it began thematically and with sort of like the ultimate artist colony of the Western world in the Renaissance.
And also the Renaissance is the first time that in a really, really profound way art, politics, money, and religion all seem to sort of just collide with each other.
And also the humanitarian philosophies and opulence of the era
And it just seemed like a good starting point for an artist colony.
And there were so many artists, you know, for those few hundred years.
So I thought, well, this seems like a good artist colony to begin with.
But I have to say, I was nervous about starting in the Renaissance because I thought, oh, no, people are going to think this is like some kind of, you know, funky historical novel or something.
And I have to say, that occurred to me early on.
Yeah.
And, you know, and I thought... But what kind of fieldwork did you have to do with this?
Did you go to Florence?
Oh, I haven't been to Florence in years.
Mm-hmm.
But...
And when I was in Florence, I had no intention of writing about it.
So it wasn't that I was sort of on the lookout.
And mostly I just, because I'm a fiction writer,
I mind travel a lot, you know, and I think about it, you know.
I've had automobile accidents because I was mind traveling.
Yeah, exactly.
I don't have to operate heavy machinery when I'm doing that.
Because it's going to be pretty bad.
But, you know, so I think, well, I'll just, you know, what would it be like if I were here?
What would it be like if I were there?
And I didn't worry too much about the way the characters spoke because, you know, they would actually be speaking in Italian anyway.
So it wasn't like I had to come up with some kind of weird,
you know, English elocutions or something.
But ambiance is important and to have a sense of, you really have to have a feel for the place, I think.
Yeah, and I think that also human nature has been pretty... Well, that stays the same.
Yeah.
Just read Shakespeare if you want to see human nature that hasn't changed, right?
Exactly.
So I thought if you got the sort of emotional landscape, you know, if it seemed true or correct,
then the reader would just follow you through the rest of it and not worry about exactly what is placed in the room.
You do use this metaphor of passing in a way, passing as a boy, passing as a mulatto.
Were you mindful of this or is that just the way it worked for the novel?
Well, I knew what the Renaissance story was.
That was the first thing I knew about this book.
I had the image of this girl spine on Michelangelo.
But, and then I knew that she was dressed like a boy and I knew it was partly to get, you know, to make this easier, this hiding on the floor and climbing in through the windows.
But then I also realized that it was because she was in love with him and he loved boys.
So she wanted to be a boy.
You talk about a switch, you know, off the moment of discovery.
Go ahead, I'm sorry.
Oh, and then she also wants to be a boy because at that time,
if you wanted a life of art, it was better to be a boy.
I mean, there's a lot of reasons for her wanting to change gender, but I think primary, in a way, she loves him, you know, and I think all that he means to her.
And then I knew I was going to write about the Harlem Renaissance, and I actually kind of wanted the book to end in the Harlem Renaissance, but I couldn't work that out.
So I thought, well,
At whatever point the Harlem Renaissance comes in, I wanted to mirror.
I wanted a girl, again, passing, in this case, an Italian-American woman passing, an African-American woman, and passing as his wife.
And I wanted her in the Renaissance, and I wanted her doing what she does for her own sort of artistic aspirations, but for love of this man who loves her back, unlike me.
the Michelangelo story.
Do you see a constant in your books, a thematic constant in your three books?
I mean, I do, yeah, I think.
Maybe you could articulate it for me.
Well, in Quilt, for me, a lot of that book was about structure and what you could make the structure do, and the stories were kind of secondary.
But thematically, for me, it was about the need to be joined in groups
or marriage, friendship, and the need to be alone and solitary, which I think is the whole push-me-pull-you of the life of the artist.
You need other people, but you really need to be alone.
And then these women get together and they make art.
They make quilts, but they're very beautiful quilts.
I mean, they do make art.
So I think it's got kind of a life of the artist, art theme to it.
But that's only for me.
I wouldn't expect the reader to notice that.
And then in the second book, the book about the woman disappearing,
and, you know, what if no one just notices her, even though ostensibly it's about age and also how we make ourselves disappear, I think on its absolute deepest level for me, it's about what if no one notices your work, what if it's your art that defines you, and nobody cares for your art, you become the invisible artist.
And then the third one is overtly about these themes.
There seems to be a generational concern throughout your work, too.
I mean, there is this...
this awareness, you know, of, I hate to use the word roots, but, you know, what you've inherited.
Is that a fair observation, do you think?
Well, you know, I can't remember the exact Faulkner quote, and you might know it.
What about the past isn't over, it's not even past.
Yeah, that's what I think about when I write, is that... I like that quote, I don't care what I call it, but... Yeah, you know what I mean.
Yeah, I think so, yeah.
I'm a great Faulkner fan, too, and it's funny that one doesn't come to...
history is always with us.
You know, there's no such thing as history in a sense.
And I feel that way in all my books, too, that you're never that far from what happened before, which is why you can write about, or I can write about, I feel, I hope, you know, the Renaissance and the 19th century and the 20th century, because it's not even passed.
Oh, that's a fake.
It's a close change.
Yeah.
Jane didn't really, I have really no biographical background on you, which is really unusual.
I did a search of the Internet, and of course I couldn't find any of them.
But could you just tell me a little bit about yourself writing, been a biographical background?
You said you're from California, for instance.
When your first book was published, what, 91, I think that was, right?
Yes.
Could you tell me how old you are?
I usually use the age if that doesn't bother you at all.
No, because it doesn't change anything.
It doesn't change.
I'm 42 now.
I sold quilt right before my 35th birthday.
That's great.
But I wrote this story called How to Make an American Quilt in the summer of 1988.
And I was sort of midway through this graduate writing program at UCI.
UCI, what's that, Irvine?
Irvine, yeah.
And...
I wrote that story really as an exercise for myself.
And my stories always had sort of like a collage or a fractured narrative.
And so I suddenly found myself writing about, you know, these women who quilt, and it looked like a quilt.
And, you know, the theme of the quilt or the metaphor of the quilt seemed to work really well.
And since I don't sew or quilt, I never met any quilters, never lived in a small town.
They aren't my grandmothers.
I mean, I just made the whole thing up.
It's a wonderful metaphor, though.
Yeah, isn't it?
Yeah, it really is.
Because you're, like, yanking it apart and putting it together.
Oh, sure.
But it can be a group activity.
It can be an artistic activity.
Yeah.
It can be a blanket on a bed.
That's right.
But, I mean, it's individual, and yet it's collective.
I mean, it's got a lot of possibilities there, you know?
Yeah.
And so it was just really interesting to me.
When I wrote the short story, I just, you know, put it down.
I wasn't going to give it to my teacher because I thought...
He'd see something that had quilts in it and think, well, you know, who wants to read about quilts or quilters or anything?
But my teacher actually ended up calling me up and asked if I'd been writing over the summer.
And this is all I had, so I gave it to him.
And he just loved it.
I mean, he just thought that it was just this really wonderful story.
And he saw what I saw in it.
And he didn't see anything like, you know, warm and fuzzy and heartfelt or whatever some people see in it.
He got the structure part of it, what I was trying to do that way.
And anyways, I ended up turning it into a novel in the fall of 1989.
I sent it to an agent in early 1990.
She took me on as a client.
My editor bought it.
Who was the agent?
My agent is Joy Harris.
Yeah, I don't know her.
Do you still have her?
Oh, God, I'm at her house.
I love her.
She's the best.
Yeah, great.
Joy, J-O-Y?
J-O-Y.
Harris?
Harris.
Okay, good.
Go ahead, I'm sorry.
And then my editor is Diane Reverend, and I've been with her all three books now.
Now, the first book was Knopf, is that right?
No, it was Villard.
Villard, okay, which is Random House.
The first book was Villard, and this one is HarperCollins.
Okay, so you went with her?
Yeah.
I mean, she's...
She's so great for me.
I mean, I know that editors are sort of personal to each writer in a way, and I've been really lucky to keep the same editor for all three books.
But between those two women, professionally, I've just, you know, I hate, I mean, I've been blessed.
I don't know how else to say it.
No, I know the feeling.
Let's see.
Do you have a sense of your reader?
Yes.
No, not really.
I mean, it's very funny because I know that for the first book there were a lot of quilters that read this, and I had no idea there were so many.
I thought there were maybe 15 in the whole country.
I didn't know because I knew nothing about quilting, you know.
I mean, I did a little bit of research for my book, but I wasn't really knowledgeable, and it's just enormous subculture.
And so I have a lot of quilter readers, and they seem to be of, you know, they run a gamut of ages, which was the other thing that was unexpected.
And then also, there seem to be a lot of people in, a lot of teachers, high school and college, that really like this book and that ended up bringing it into the classroom.
But I don't know if people who are college age or high school age would have picked up this book otherwise.
You don't see it as a gender type of an audience, though?
I don't, because I feel that I don't...
I mean, you certainly do develop women's issues.
Yeah, yeah, I do.
But you can't be described as a hardliner or a radical either, you know, I don't think.
No, I mean, I'm a feminist, but my definition, and I've been one since I was 17, but my definition has always been
But I think every contemporary woman is a feminist, basically, I would think.
Go ahead.
I'm sorry.
Well, not a lot of the younger ones.
I mean, I taught college for a little while, and there's something very strange that goes on with women who are behind me.
And my definition of feminism has always been, I just want equal opportunity.
Let me rise or fail on my own.
Don't hold me down.
Don't stand in my way.
But I don't expect to succeed just because I'm a woman.
You know what I mean?
And that's it.
That's my sole feminist stance.
Okay.
And because it's the heart of economics.
But don't hold me back because I'm a woman either.
Exactly.
Which is at the center of certainly this book.
Go ahead.
I'm sorry.
So I just feel that way about it.
But I know that I'm often called a woman's writer.
And I don't mind being called a woman's writer as long as I'm not being subtly dismissed in the middle of it.
Or as long as I used to say, I'm not told I can throw a ball good for a girl.
I mean, because we don't a lot of times call male writers male writers.
They're American writers.
I'd rather be an American writer.
But not because I'm ashamed of writing about women or being associated with them.
It's just, like I said, I don't want to be dismissed.
Now, are you familiar with the books of Elizabeth Berg, for instance?
You know, she's a random house writer.
I did a profile of her for Publishers Weekly a couple years ago.
And she's tremendously popular among women.
But you can see her books are quite definitely...
why they would appeal to women and they wouldn't appeal to men.
I think I have a greater, probably a greater appeal for women.
But I think more women read novels than men do anyway.
Yeah, statistically.
They're much stronger readers, I find.
That's the nature of the piece, so to speak, is that women are reading more than men.
But anyway, go ahead.
I'm sorry.
I keep interrupting you here.
Yeah, I think that that's true.
But one thing that was nice when Quilt came out, even though it was seen as a novel that focuses on women's stories, people were also nice enough, I guess, to say it wasn't a male-bashing book.
It wasn't like the men were villains or responsible for everything terrible that happened in these women's lives.
And it's true, the men are just on the periphery of Quilt.
They're not villainous.
There's not wife-beating or any kind of...
I think the worst you can say about the men I write about, and this is true of my second book, too, is that they're just flawed.
But, you know, we're all flawed.
And maybe sometimes they're a little weak, but it's not like I really take off after them in a way.
And I think that, you know, I think good books, of which I hope mine are, don't, you know, tend to have these black and white characters, regardless of what gender you're writing about.
But I do have more male readers now.
With each book, I seem to get more male readers.
And I think also the movie of Quilt helped to get me readers of different ages.
How did the first book do in terms of numbers?
I can only tell you what I read.
I've read that
Quilts sold, I think, I mean like well over a million copies.
Wow.
I know.
It's not unbelievable, but I read that.
We're talking paperback and hardcover, of course.
Yeah, of course, yeah.
How did the hardcover do?
Do you know offhand?
God, the hardcover might have done, and again, I've read this, so anywhere from 55 to 65,000.
That's great.
I don't really know which.
Wow, that's great.
And what's the first printing of this book, do you know?
That I don't know.
It's funny.
Everyone laughs at me, but I ask almost no questions of the publishers because I'm too scared to know the answers.
So I only know about that kind of thing if I read about it or someone says, and by the way, Whitney.
And I assume you're working on a new novel now?
Well, I started something over a year ago, and I don't know if I'll stick with it.
So I'm not working on anything new quite yet because, well, I'm not home, but I always take sort of a little break afterwards.
Good.
Well, plus you have to work with this one.
This one will make requirements of you for sure.
Yeah.
Publicity and readings and all that stuff.
But I'm very happy with the way this one turned out.
I don't know.
This one...
In each book I try and say what I want to say, but sometimes it comes out right and sometimes I'm not sure.
And in this book I feel like, you know, I had that lucky writer moment of, you know, writing the book I really wanted to write.
Yeah.
You're still waiting for the big reviews, I assume.
Is that right?
Yes, I haven't gotten any yet.
I did a search of the Internet looking for them, and the PW was wonderful, you know, the nice starred review there.
That was nice, yeah.
There's one out in Seattle, I guess.
The whole reviewer, I love the way she gets more attention than I did.
I've never seen that in a review before, where the reviewer actually complains.
It's amazing.
Complain?
Well, I didn't complain, but you were talking about your first book, and how it got more attention in this newspaper than her book did.
Oh, yeah.
I've never seen that before, that somebody would actually say that in a review.
One thing I did like about the review was she was very candid about
You know, liking the first one.
Yeah, not liking the first one.
So that's right, yeah.
But that's one of those cases where that didn't bother me at all.
You know, I felt like, okay, you know, that's fair.
Well, the expectation, when you have a real hit the first time around, it must be tough.
Imagine Joe Heller, Catch-22, first book out.
Oh, God, that's like the ultimate.
Yeah, but his whole life has been affected by that.
Every book he does is compared to that.
Robert Penn Warren, you know, All the King's Men.
How do you follow that up with a novel, you know?
I know.
It's very hard.
I think you're best off being like Harper Lee and just letting it all go.
She quit right there.
Yeah.
Where George Higgins, you know, he wrote The Friends of Eddie Coyle in about 40 or 50 books since then.
But name one of them, you know.
They're always comparing the subsequent books to that first one.
But, hey, you know, I wouldn't mind having in my obituary author of Catch-22, right?
Oh, I know.
I could live with that.
I know.
I think it's just funny because I think, you know, you just keep raising the bar for yourself with, you know, each time or something, but you forget how high you placed and how lucky you are.
That's right.
Well, that's a good quote.
That's an excellent quote.
And I think we can quit on that.
Okay.
So good luck.
And thank you so much.
Nice talking to you.
Okay.
Bye-bye.
Bye.